Research on Intergenerational Education Mobility
in Uzbekistan
Proposal
1 Introduction and Motivation
The Government of Uzbekistan views the adoption of new technologies and technological progress
as one of the primary drivers of economic growth and improvements in the living standards of the
population in the country. But such an agenda requires an increasing flow of talented, well-trained
people. When all talents in society are fully realized, the labor markets become more eﬀicient, and
productivity grows at a faster rate. This is possible only in socially mobile societies, where family
circumstances do not matter in explaining educational outcomes.
The individuals’ opportunities to reach their full potential are determined by complex interactions
between inherited traits, social norms, the environment in which children are raised, labor markets,
and public policies. Education plays a major role in defining a person’s career trajectory and lifetime
earnings. The investment in a child’s education strongly depends on the income and education of
the parents as well as on their preferences and risk perceptions. Better-educated parents might
be more effective in producing better outcomes in their children. The complementarity between
parental human capital and investments in children leads wealthier parents to invest more in their
children’s human capital than poor parents. Such intergenerational persistence of education could
perpetuate cross-generational income inequality, lowering the chances of children from poor families
succeeding in life. Targeted government interventions are needed to draw such children into science
and innovation, and policies designed to improve intergenerational mobility could increase the
number of inventors and boost economic growth.
For countries of Central Asia in general, and for Uzbekistan in particular, where almost 40 percent of
the population is under 18 and about 35 percent resides in rural areas, educational mobility is one of
the primary factors defining economic, social, and cultural futures. The large and growing number
of young people presents an opportunity for Uzbekistan to leverage this demographic dividend
to fuel economic growth. However, without investment in equitable education, the country risks
falling into the cycle of increasing poverty and inequality that could slow down the adoption of new
technologies, and reduce rates of innovation and economic growth.
Uzbekistan is a country dominated by traditional family structures characterized by respect for el-
ders and community involvement in child-rearing, all of which shape educational outcomes. Multi-
generational households are typical across the region, with grandparents playing an important
role in child-rearing decisions and child discipline, especially in the presence of the massive male
1

Intergenerational Education Mobility in Uzbekistan Proposal
migration that transforms family relationships and gender roles. The mahala (neighborhood com-
munity) in Uzbekistan institutionalizes collective child-rearing beyond the extended family, creating
a unique context to study intergenerational mobility in education.
The transition to a market economy fundamentally altered the educational system and family
structures in Uzbekistan. The period after independence saw a renewal of national cultural and
religious traditions, including Islamic principles that emphasized respect for parents, moral develop-
ment, and gender-specific socialization. On the other hand, globalization, migration, and increased
cultural and information exchange have exposed parents in Central Asia to alternative approaches
to educational practices. For example, families where parents come from different cultures often
combine different ideas about discipline, autonomy, and their children’s success. Many families in
the region struggle to maintain traditional hierarchical family structures on one hand, while adapt-
ing to global demands for inclusive, comprehensive education of their children. Urban families
in Uzbekistan are increasingly open to more modern approaches to education. In contrast, rural
families tend to adhere more to traditional approaches, encouraging their children to continue the
occupations of their parents.
However, despite the importance of intergenerational educational mobility for long-term economic
growth, I am not aware of any rigorous academic research on this topic in Uzbekistan. This project
aims to fill this gap in the literature.
2 Related Literature
This research is based on the body of literature on intergenerational mobility. Hertz et al. (2007)
find significant variation in the cross-country levels of intergenerational educational mobility, with
high persistence of educational attainment in Latin America and much higher educational mobility
in countries of Northern Europe. Chevalier, Denny, and McMahon (2009) look at the patterns of
education mobility in developed countries and report that expanding access to higher education
is not always associated with increased mobility. Causa and Johansson (2009) find a positive
and significant correlation between parental human capital and their children’s educational and
wage outcomes in OECD countries. Financial constraints may hold back talented children from
poor rural families. Razzu and Wambile (2022) demonstrate that children’s educational outcomes
depend strongly on their parents’ educational status, but that the strength of this association
is weaker for younger generations. Van der Weide and others (2024) compile a global database
of intergenerational education mobility across 153 countries, demonstrating that such mobility is
estimated to be lower in the average developing country than in the average high-income country.
Several papers study the link between social mobility and economic development. Aydemir and
Yazici (2019) discover that regions of Türkiye with better school availability, greater social capital,
higher home resources, and lower educational inequalities tend to have higher intergenerational
mobility. Güell and others (2018) find that in Italy, provinces with higher levels of economic
activity, lower inequality, and higher social capital and educational attainment have greater in-
tergenerational social mobility. Neidhöfer et al. (2024) study the relationship between changes in
educational intergenerational mobility and regional economic indicators in Latin America. They
report that increasing social mobility correlates with rising income per capita, income growth, and
other development indicators.
2

Intergenerational Education Mobility in Uzbekistan Proposal
3 Research Questions
In this project, which relies on methodological and empirical approaches to studying intergenera-
tional educational mobility, I plan to examine the factors determining intergenerational mobility
in Uzbekistan. I will address three research questions:
1. How has intergenerational educational mobility in Uzbekistan evolved over the past decade
(2010–2023), and what impact have the 2017–2021 education reforms had on breaking the
cycle of educational persistence?
2. What are the main determinants of intergenerational educational mobility in Uzbekistan, and
how do regional disparities affect educational outcomes?
3. How does parental human capital (education, income, occupation) interact with household
characteristics (migration status, multigenerational structure, mahala involvement) to influ-
ence investment in children’s education?
4 Data
I plan to use data from several sources. First, I will use data on intergenerational education mobility
from three rounds of the Life in Transition Survey (2010, 2016, and 2022–23). I will supplement
this with data from the Uzbekistan Household Budget Survey. In addition, I plan to use data on
education infrastructure, university admissions and enrollment rates, and migration statistics from
the relevant ministries.
5 Empirical Strategy
The analysis will document changes in intergenerational mobility in Uzbekistan over the last decade,
both nationally and regionally, using relative and absolute measures of intergenerational educational
mobility.
The next part of the project will relate the characteristics of parents and the households where the
children live to the investments in their education. I plan to use the restrictions on in-person school
attendance in Uzbekistan during the COVID-19 pandemic as a strategy to identify how parental
human capital is related to investment in the education of their children.
In particular, I will focus on the impact of regional income inequality on parental investment in
their children’s education. When children could not attend schools in person, parental education
likely became more important for supporting children’s learning, as less-educated and lower-income
parents may struggle assisting with online education.
Using a difference-in-differences (DiD) approach to compare pre- and post-pandemic educational
outcomes across households with varying parental education levels, I will estimate the causal effect
of parental human capital on educational investment. I will use the 2022–23 LiTS round, combined
with administrative data on school closures by region, for this analysis.
3

Intergenerational Education Mobility in Uzbekistan Proposal
6 Expected Contributions and Policy Relevance
This research will be the first comprehensive study of intergenerational educational mobility in
Uzbekistan. It will examine how education reforms, cultural factors, and economic conditions
shape educational opportunities and affect the upward mobility of children from disadvantaged
backgrounds.
The results of this study will help design policy interventions aimed at creating a more equitable
educational system, promoting innovation, and boosting economic growth. Understanding the main
determinants of educational inequality in Uzbekistan is crucial for the country to achieve its vision
of becoming a knowledge-based, innovation-driven economy that fully leverages the potential of its
young population.
References
Aydemir, A. B., & Yazici, H. (2019). Intergenerational education mobility and the level of devel-
opment: Evidence from turkey. European Economic Review, 116, 160–185. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.euroecorev.2019.04.003
Causa, O., & Johansson, A. (2009). Intergenerational social mobility in OECD countries (Working
Paper 707). OECD Economics Department. https://doi.org/10.1787/223106258208
Chevalier, A., Denny, K., & McMahon, D. (2009). A multi-country study of inter-generational
educational mobility. In P. Dolton, R. Asplund, & E. Barth (Eds.), Education and inequality
across europe. Edward Elgar.
Guell, M., Pellizzari, M., Pica, G., & Rodriguez Mora, J. V. (2018). Correlating social mobility
and economic outcomes. The Economic Journal , 128(612), F353–F403. https://doi.org/10.
1111/ecoj.12599
Hertz, T., Jayasundera, T., Piraino, P., Selcuk, S., Smith, N., & Verashchagina, A. (2008). The
inheritance of educational inequality: International comparisons and fifty-year trends. The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy , 7 (2). https://doi.org/10.2202/1935-1682.1775
Neidh”ofer, G., Ciaschi, M., Gasparini, L., & Serrano, J. (2024). Social mobility and economic
development. Journal of Economic Growth , 29(2), 327–359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10887-
023-09234-8
Weide, R. van der, Lakner, C., Mahler, D. G., Narayan, A., & Gupta, R. (2024). Intergenerational
mobility around the world: A new database. Journal of Development Economics , 166, 103167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2023.103167
4